Hello everybody and welcome to this month's Posit team workflow demo. It's
been a few months since I last gave one of these demos so this is the first time
we're meeting. My name is Ryan Johnson and I'm a data science advisor here at
Posit. So in today's workflow we are going to focus in on PDFs, which is a
file format we've probably all encountered at some point. Now we're
going to kick off the demo talking about what are PDFs and why are they such a
popular method for sharing documents. And then we'll jump into the actual
demos where we'll demonstrate how to create some really beautiful scalable
professional PDFs using a combination of Posit's open source tools and our
professional tools. So with that let's go ahead and get started. Alright so just a
few slides here to get started. And the first thing I want to talk about is
what is PDF, which stands for portable document format, particularly why is it
so popular. So if you've ever been in a situation where you had to share a
document with somebody you probably had to stop and think and consider what is
the optimal format for sharing this document. For example if my documents in
a Microsoft Word document and I want to share it with somebody else you probably
ask some questions to yourself like does that person also have Microsoft Word and
if so do they have the same version or at least a relatively recent version or
similar version to what I have. Maybe if they don't have Microsoft Word but also
work in Google Docs we're not sure. So maybe you try a different format and you
want to create an HTML document. So if you go to share an HTML document
with somebody you have a whole new set of questions such as what internet web
browser will they use to open up this document which is essentially a web page.
Are they going to use Safari, Firefox, Chrome and depending on what browser they
use it may render slightly differently. Now for a lot of these HTML formats they
require some system dependencies such as JavaScript. So if they go to open an HTML
document and they don't have JavaScript installed will it render appropriately
we don't know. Also if you go to try to email an HTML document to somebody a lot
of email clients will actually block emails that have HTML files as
attachments so that's something else you need to consider. And then particularly
important for today's demo what if we want to share a document that's created
using something like Jupyter Notebooks or Quarto or R Markdown. So if we go to
share one of these documents does that recipient also have R and Python
installing can they even open up these documents and if so do they have the
same package versions and language version that I do to ensure that it's
the exact same document and it's rendered the exact same way when they
open it up on their system. So that's a lot of questions to answer and this
really is the driving force behind why PDFs were created because they are
perfect for cross-platform compatibility. So if I create a PDF on my Mac
computer and I go to share with somebody using a Windows machine I can be pretty
confident it's gonna render exactly the same because it preserves formatting
which is really important. PDFs is also something known as a what you see is
what you get format meaning the content won't shift reflow or break apart when
open on different devices. So unlike formats such as Word where formatting
can change depending on the software or device things are just going to stay
pretty consistent with PDFs. PDFs are also by default non-editable so if you
go to share with somebody they're really not going to be able to edit it.
Now there are some ways you can edit a PDF but usually by default they're
non-editable and they're also print ready so if you receive a PDF you can
typically file print and that printed output will look pretty good and there's
a whole lot of other reasons why PDFs are so popular for sharing documents. Now
most software for creating documents has some type of built-in PDF export option
but when it comes to the creation of specialized documents that include
things like mathematical equations, symbols, citations, other complex
structures like chapters, sections, table of contents, journal formats for example,
complex tables and figures, chances are you're likely going to come across a
tool called LaTeX. Now in full disclosure I have never wrote LaTeX code
so I can't speak too much to how complex it is but from what I heard it is a
fantastic tool but it does have some complications and limitations. Now
fortunately many of the open source tools that we'll work with today have
methods to create PDFs without ever having to know how to code in LaTeX but
there are some newer tools out there for creating PDFs which we'll discuss
later on today. They actually have no dependency on LaTeX. Now for now let's
start with tools that have been around for years and that's R Markdown.
We are going to create a PDF report using R Markdown but to do this we need
some data to report on. So I'm going to be using the Gapminder data set and some
of you may be familiar with this especially if you're at our conference
in 2024. We actually had a keynote completely dedicated to the Gapminder
data set but the reason why I'd like to use it in my demos is that it's pretty
simple. It has about 1,700 or closer to 1,800 rows but it only has seven columns
and you can see those seven columns here. So on the left hand side we're looking
at country and the continent that country is in. We have the year and then
we have a life expectancy which is the life expectancy for someone born that
year from that country. We have the population for that year and also the
GDP per capita. Now this data set is actually ideal for this workflow because
it allows us to demonstrate how to create a template PDF and efficiently
generate multiple PDFs for each country in a customized time frame. So this is
kind of a pictorial image of what we're going to be doing at
least to start. We're going to create a template R Markdown document and this
single R Markdown document is going to be used to generate any PDF we want for
a specific country and also for a specific date range. Alright so with that
let's go ahead and switch over to Posit Workbench and we'll show you the
template R Markdown that we're going to be focusing in on. Alright so here I am
within the home screen of Posit Workbench and you can see I currently
have an RStudio session running. Let's go ahead and click into it and within
this RStudio project which I've called R Markdown PDF you can see I have a few
files down here. We're going to start with this basic R Markdown document. This is
going to be our template document. So once I click on it I'm going to go ahead
and walk you through what you're seeing here. So at the very top we have our
YAML and we're going to focus in just on a single country to start and we'll do
that United States. And importantly you can see right here the output is PDF
document. So this is the output that when we click knit here at the very top it'll
generate a PDF using LaTeX. I've set some chunk option parameters here and
then this first code chunk we're going to load some packages and again we're
focusing on the United States and for the Gapminder dataset we can also choose
the date range. Now the Gapminder dataset goes from about 1952 to 2007 so
we'll just encompass the entire date range. So I'll go ahead and run this code
chunk by clicking the play button. And while this is running and finishing up
running the next code chunk here is just going to generate a map just because I
thought it'd be interesting or nice to have on the document an actual you know
image of where does this country you know live in the world. So I'll click
play here and this is the output from that code where you can see the United
States is highlighted here in blue. I've also included just some text here to
replicate what a typical document would include both figures, tables, but also
some text. Alright down here we're going to create a table and this table is
going to be created using the very popular package in R known as GT. If
you've never used GT before it's a fantastic package for creating really
nice tables in R and there's also an equivalent in Python called great tables
which you can check out. So this table is going to summarize all the the the
columns for a specific country for the United States. So let's go ahead and run
it just take a look at this table. So here you can see the United States
overview and then by year we get life expectancy and I've also color-coded it
here which will be important a little bit later on and then I have the
population you can see the nice syntax here with millions and GDP per capita is
the last column. It's a really nice looking table and this is kind of
showing this HTML output and it's really important just take a mental note of
what this looks like right now because as you'll see in a little bit it's
actually not going to be as conserved when we render to a PDF. All right so we
have some more text down here and then we're going to create some plots using
ggplot. So this first plot right here I'll click play is showing the United
States life expectancy which is shown here in this orange line compared to
every other country in the world over time and we can generate a similar plot
for population. So here we have the United States population compared to
every other country in the world as these light gray lines over time and
then finally we can do this for GDP per capita and you can see where United
States falls with respect to every other country. So now we have these nice plots
we have a table we have some text let's go ahead and render this document as a
PDF using the LaTeX. So after I click knit here you can see some logs being
printed here this render tab within our studio so we'll give this just a few
seconds to run. All right let me go ahead and bring it on to my screen here so you
all can see it and here's that final PDF and it looks pretty nice let me zoom out
a little bit so we can take a look so we see our plot here is nice and conserved
right at the top here's some text and then here's our GT table and it still
looks pretty good but it definitely looks a little different from the HTML
version when we ran it within the R Markdown document and the rest of
document again looks pretty nice the text looks good here's some of those
images that are nicely embedded another image another image and there we go.
Alright so we're going to use this R Markdown document to basically again be
our template so that we can input additional countries in additional time
frames. So let me go ahead and just quickly come back to the slides here.
Alright so now that we've created this template R Markdown let's talk about
using this R Markdown as a template for additional PDFs again especially if I
want to change the country or change the date range. So currently I have this
hard-coded in the document you can see here on lines 22 and 23 if I have a
specific country focus I have to add it as a variable here in this R Markdown
document and similar for a date range. Now it'd be really nice is that instead
of hard-coding this we could add these variables as parameters to this R
Markdown because again maybe someone else wants to view a different country
or a different date range and coming into the R Markdown and forcing someone
to actually delete United States and type in their own country and the same
thing for the date range how can we make the variable selection process better
more enjoyable. So that's where parameterized R Markdowns come into play.
So what I'm showing over here on the left-hand side is an expanded YAML so
again the YAML is that very top chunk at the within our R Markdown document. So
we're still generating a PDF document but here starting on line 3 you can see
I'm defining some parameters specifically I have my date range where I
have some default values we're gonna make it a slider bar we have min max and
a few other things as well and then we also have country focus and similarly
we'll make this as like an input like a select input and we're gonna make all
the various choices the various countries in the Gapminder data set. So
once we've defined these parameters within this R Markdown YAML there's
actually a way when you go to knit this document if you click the little
drop-down instead of knitting to a particular format you can say knit with
parameters and what that gives you is a really nice user interface for inputting
parameters. So here you can see I can easily change the date range up here at
the top and then I can easily select a different country and once I selected
these two I can hit knit at the very bottom and it will generate an
additional PDF report. Let me go ahead and switch back to Posit Workbench and
we're going to demo parameterize R Markdowns. Alright so I'm back in the
same RStudio environment we were just in I'm going to close out of our template
R Markdown document and I'm going to open up this other R Markdown document
you can see down here in my files tab called parameterized. So here's that same
YAML that we just saw in this slides and again this what this allows us to do is
knit this document with parameters. So again I click on this little drop-down
at the very top and select knit with parameters and once we do that we get a
window here just give it a few seconds to boot up and it gives us the two input
options. We have a slider bar to choose our date or year range and we can also
select a different country. So just to make things interesting let's go ahead
and change up the date range so we'll just select 1977 to 2002 and for a
country let's go ahead and just scroll up a little bit we'll pick a random
country let's do Cameroon and I'll select knit. So now it's generating
another PDF document using LaTeX but it's going to generate this PDF for that
specific date range and for the country Cameroon. So let's just give this a few
seconds to run. Alright so now the PDF is created it's rendering and here we are
so now you can see Cameroon is highlighted and if I just scroll down a
little bit you can see the PDF still looks pretty nice and importantly you
can see our table here it's only showing the the dates for which we
selected. So within that slider bar date range we have years 1977 going up to
2002. So that's how we can create parameterize our markdowns. Now we can
actually take this document and we could publish it to PositConnect but before we
do that I want to come back to the slides and again talk about that table
issue that we mentioned earlier. Alright so going back to the table that we
created with the GT package in our markdown this is what we want this is
that nice HTML output but this is what we got when we rendered it to PDF using
LaTeX and again it looks okay but the formatting is not quite you know what we
want. So this is a good introduction to a tool called Types and if you've never
heard of Types before it is an open source markup based type setting system
very similar to LaTeX and it's designed to be as powerful as LaTeX while being
much easier to learn and use. Now Quarto one of our other open source tools for
creating scientific documents it includes the Types command-line
interface so there's actually no separate installation of Types required.
What that means is that when you install Quarto Types is already baked into it
so you and this is actually different from how LaTeX works. Typically when you
want to generate a PDF using R Markdown and LaTeX you do need to install LaTeX
or some version of LaTeX outside of R. Types is also it has super fast render
times and you can easily create highly customized templates. So the next couple
slides here is just a show-and-tell showing you some of these really cool
templates that you can create. For example if you're creating any type of journal
article for a scientific journal you can build that with Types as shown here. This
is one that I'm particularly excited for so I came from an academic
background where I had to present posters at various conferences and what
you can actually do now using the Types integration within Quarto is create
scientific posters as shown here. You can even do something as simple as create
letters and maybe even flyers. So for example for your chemistry department
here's a really nice flyer you can build using Types within Quarto. So Quarto in
version 1.5 which is the most recent version as of today it now allows HTML
tables such as what we're seeing over here on the left-hand side with custom
CSS styling to be output in Types. So instead of the table looking like this
we can now have it look like this when it gets rendered to PDF. So we're going
to switch back to Posit Workbench again we're going to open up a Quarto
document and show you some of this Types integration and I'm also
going to demonstrate how you can render a Quarto document with parameters in a
similar fashion we did with the R Markdown document. All right so here we
are back in Posit Workbench and I've actually switched to a separate R
Studio project called Quarto Types and within this project I have a document
called QuartoDoc.qmd which is what you're seeing up here in the top left
quadrant. So in this Quarto document you can see up here at the very top we have
a very similar YAML to what was in the R Markdown document but here we're going
to render this Quarto document so you render Quarto you knit R Markdown
documents but we're going to render it to this Types format and I've added some
specifications you can see here. You can also see here starting on line 11 I'm
adding in some parameters specifically country focus with the
default of Peru and the date range from 1952 to 2000. So if I wanted to render
this document with parameters we don't have that same drop-down we have with
R Markdown but instead we can do it from the terminal using Quarto's command
line interface tool. So I'm going to go ahead and select the terminal here and
we are going to run the Quarto CLI tool to render this document which is
Quarto.qmd or QuartoDoc.qmd and then we're going to feed in some
parameters to this line here. So to do that we're going to give dash capital P
that's our argument for parameters and we'll give it the country focus parameter
to start we have a colon and I'm just going to pick Canada as another country
someone might be interested in and then for another parameter we're going to add
in our date range and I'm just going to switch it up from the default so I'm
going to go ahead and select 1977 to 2002 and I'll close off that bracket and
once I hit enter that will render this Quarto document but again it's going to
render a PDF using the types integration so we'll just give this a
few seconds. Alright it actually rendered it here within my file directory so if I
click on this QuartoDoc PDF here is our new PDF document created using types so
here we have Canada and you can see the country highlighted but probably the
most important thing here is the table and you can see the formatting looks
almost identical to the HTML format that we're really kind of desiring so this
looks really good and this is again just highlighting some of the new features
within Quarto where you can have some of these HTML custom CSS directly within
your PDF documents. Alright so let's come back to the slides here and we'll move
on to the next workflow. Alright so to finish up today's workflow we are going
to essentially create a Shiny application which replicates that user
interface we saw with our markdowns for selecting the various parameters. So
because that feature doesn't at least yet exist within Quarto we're going to
create a custom Shiny application which is shown over here on the right hand
side. This is at least the user interface and you can see it's simply nothing
special it's just a series of inputs so we have a drop-down for the various
country we have our date range which we're used to but I've also added in
some extra flair with the help of the types integration which gives users the
ability to download either a document PDF or they can actually download a
poster PDF so simple as clicking a button and then selecting download PDF
report a user can then download whatever document they desire. So we're
going to go ahead and show you this Shiny application and then we'll wrap
things up by publishing it to PositConnect and showing you how you can
then share the Shiny application with your co-workers or whoever you would
like. Okay so here I am within that same RStudio project but this time I opened
up this app.r file which is what you're seeing up here in the top left quadrant
and just as a side note we'll be sure to include all this source code in a
github repository and we'll make sure you all are aware of it. But let me just
quickly run through some key features in this Shiny application. So at the very
top we're defining our user interface and here are all those various inputs
that we just saw in this slide. So we have a selecting input for country
slider for our date radio button so they can change the format and here's
our download button. Now if you scroll down to the server function starting on
line 27 just to highlight right here this is where we take the inputs from
our Shiny application and create a list of parameters which will eventually be
fed into the quarto render function. So depending if they have documents
selected or if they have posters selected it'll render either the quarto
doc QMD or the quarto poster dot QMD and we'll feed in the custom parameters
based on the various inputs the user selected. So we could run this
application here locally within Posit Workbench here in RStudio but what I'm
actually going to do is publish it to Posit Connect. Now there are a variety of
ways you can publish to Posit Connect but probably the quickest and fastest
way to get something hosted on Posit Connect is to click this blue button
here at the top of your screen. So once I click that we'll get this menu here to
define all the files over here on the left hand side that need to be included
in this deployment bundle and to briefly go through them here are the top three
these are various extensions or it's one extension for the poster format. So this
poster format was actually downloaded as a quarto extension so make sure we
include that. Here's our shine application we're also going to include
a PNG logo for Posit Team and then we also need those reports the quarto doc
report and the quarto poster report. I'm going to be publishing it to an instance
of Posit Connect which I've already connected to and I've actually
previously published this so I'm just going to go ahead and update the same
piece of content. So once I hit publish it's going to go pretty quick. Here's my
deploy tab that opens up and what's happening is that is capturing all of my
dependencies in my environment here within RStudio. So what packages I'm
using, the versions of those packages, and what R version. Once it replicates that
environment on connect it can then deploy the shiny application and we'll
just give it a few more seconds to render.
It's almost done and here it is. Again not a very flashy shiny application but
let's go ahead and give it a test. So I'm going to go ahead and select a
different country so I'll just pick one randomly. I'll do Mexico. I'll just
briefly tweak some of the dates here so we can see those effects on the output
table and let's go ahead and start with a document. So I'll click download PDF
report and we get this little status bar at the bottom of our screen and we'll
just give this a few seconds to build this custom report. Alright so it
actually downloaded to my personal computer so I'm going to go ahead and
open it up and make sure you all can see it here. And here we go we see Mexico is
highlighted and then you can see the table for the statistics here are within
the date range that we selected here in the table. So this looks really good a
really easy way for someone to create a custom PDF report again using shiny
using the types integration. But if we wanted to have someone create a poster
instead let's go ahead and select a different country. I'll do let's do
Indonesia and we'll just do the full date range and I'll select poster and
then we'll go ahead and download this as a PDF report. Again this is going to
download to my personal computer here so let's give this a few seconds and let me
resize it so you all can see it. Here we go. So here's Indonesia you can see the
maps a little smaller we can certainly tweak this if you want to go deeper into
it. Here's our table down here in the bottom left and we get this nice
academic research poster and you can even define the authors or the Posit
Department of Awesome. So just to round out the demo here again when you have a
piece of content like a shiny application hosted on Posit Connect
ultimately you want to be able to share the shiny application with whoever you
want and that's where these access controls come into play. So here I can
click this little gear icon which brings up my content access or controls
including access control. I currently have defined specific users or groups
and so currently in this configuration I'm the only one that can view this
content. But if I wanted to share it with say a colleague or potentially a group
of users at my company I can just add them here so let's see if Rachel's
actually on here. She is. So I can select Rachel and now we are the only two
people here at Posit that can view this content. But we have some other sharing
settings like all users login required so if someone has access to Posit
Connect they'd be able to view this content which is a great way to share
content internally within your group but no one outside your company. And then if
your license allows for it there's the ability to share a interactive piece of
content like a shiny application with anyone in the world and the only thing
you would need to do to share this content is grab the URL you see at the
top of your screen. It's not the prettiest URL it's got some random
letters and numbers in it so we can customize it. I can come down here at the
bottom right and say Gapminder PDF generator and then create this custom
report save in this configuration and now to share this this application with
anyone all I have to do is copy this URL and send it to somebody just like you
would share any other website. All right so I hope today's demo was helpful and
that you now have a better understanding of the features within Posit's open
source and professional tools for creating custom PDFs and sharing them
with the world. If you have any questions then stick around and we'd be happy to
answer them during the live Q&A. Thanks everybody!
you